Charlie Kirk’s Killing Has America at War With Itself, Foreigners & Visa-seekers ‘Warned’
By Kasturi Walimbe | 13 September, 2025 | 08:42 am IST


Charlie Kirk was a polarising figure in life, but in death he has polarised the United States of America. 
The conservative, pro-gun, anti-immigration activist was shot in the neck on 10 September 2025 during one of his 
‘Prove Me Wrong’ debates at Utah Valley University. He collapsed on stage as the crowd looked on in shock. 
His body was later flown back to Arizona on Air Force Two, Vice President JD Vance’s plane.


Reactions to His Death
After Kirk’s death, Donald Trump called him “great, and even legendary”. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu 
hailed him as a defender of Judeo-Christian values. To supporters, he has already taken on the aura of a martyr. 
Critics, however, pointed out the irony — a champion of guns killed by one, moments after discussing America’s mass shootings.

The American Right has vowed vengeance. MSNBC’s Matthew Dowd was fired after suggesting that “hateful words… lead to hateful actions.” 
Trump promised a crackdown on “radical Left political violence”. Deputy Secretary of State Christopher Landau warned foreigners 
and visa-seekers that praising or trivialising Kirk’s death online would result in “appropriate action”.

A manhunt ended with the arrest of Tyler Robinson, 22, who was accused of the shooting. Authorities found ammunition 
etched with phrases such as “Hey, fascist! Catch!”. The Utah governor described the killing as a “political assassination”.


Kirk’s Political Role
Charlie Kirk, 31, was not just an influencer — he played a key role in bringing the Trump administration to power. 
Trump himself said, “Charlie got things done, from organizing on campuses to building relationships with donors.” 
JD Vance added, “He didn’t just help us win in 2024, he helped us staff the entire government.”

Kirk co-founded **Turning Point USA** in 2012 at age 18 and led it as executive director. He later founded 
Turning Point Action and joined the Council for National Policy. He became a fixture on Fox News, hosted *The Charlie Kirk Show*, 
and built a massive social media following. His books and podcasts mobilised conservative youth.



Controversial Statements
Kirk was known for provocation. He called the Civil Rights Act of the 1960s “a huge mistake” and argued that “empathy… does a lot of damage.”

In September 2025, he angered many with anti-India remarks:
- “America does not need more visas for people from India. Enough already. We’re full.”
- He accused Indian-linked accounts of interfering with U.S. tariffs debates and called for FARA investigations.
- He praised Trump for blocking outsourcing to India, saying “Hire American workers.”
- He reposted claims that Indians were major H-1B visa violators.

While hostile to India, Kirk was loyal to Israel. Netanyahu mourned him as a “lion-hearted friend” of Judeo-Christian civilization. 
Israeli Foreign Minister Gideon Saar called him an “incredible friend” who was “murdered for truth and freedom.” 
Kirk rejected claims that Israel starved Palestinians in Gaza, dismissing such images as “propaganda”.

Kirk was also openly critical of Muslims. In 2023 he said Hamas aimed to kill “every single Jew on the face of the earth.” 
On 9 September 2025, a day before his death, he posted: “Islam is the sword the left is using to slit the throat of America.”



Gun Advocacy and Irony of His Death
A staunch Second Amendment advocate, Kirk once said some gun deaths were “worth it” to preserve gun rights: 
“I think it’s worth it… so that we can have the Second Amendment to protect our other God-given rights.”

Ironically, his last public words were about mass shootings. Asked how many mass shootings had occurred in the last decade, 
he replied, “Counting or not counting gang violence?” Seconds later, he was fatally shot.
