Elon Musk’s DOGE Leaves Lingering Impact on U.S. Federal Government

Around 100 days after Elon Musk’s exit from the Trump administration, federal staff continue to struggle with the effects of his Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE). The impact of this extraordinary challenge to federal administration is likely to persist.

Operating from an office near the White House, Musk led an assertive capture of key government departments. His approach was precise — using compact groups of technology specialists to methodically break down the country’s civil service of over 2 million people.

According to the Partnership for Public Service, a non-aligned Washington DC organisation, approximately 200,000 civil servants have left federal employment to date.

Many workers, including numerous military veterans, experienced severe distress, with established careers suddenly ended and their professional contributions deemed insignificant.

After Musk’s disagreement with President Trump this spring, DOGE largely ceased operations. “Not much” endures from the programme, said Max Stier, president and CEO of the Partnership for Public Service.
“It’s a little bit like Godzilla having flattened the city and left. Godzilla is gone, but there’s still a flattened city,” Stier told AFP.

Following the public rift, Musk has called the U.S. government “basically unfixable,” arguing that politicians across parties will oppose budget cuts that could upset constituents.

Most DOGE executives departed with Musk, including Steve Davis, his deputy who directed teams infiltrating government offices and systems to implement cost reductions. However, some personnel remain in federal departments, continuing to influence operations in quieter ways.
“Don’t misunderstand the lack of the loud face that was Elon Musk to think they have disappeared,” cautioned one Pentagon employee. “DOGE is still alive and causing a ruckus.”

Several Musk allies now hold key roles in government. Airbnb co-founder and Tesla board member Joe Gebbia is leading a redesign of government websites. At the Social Security Administration, CIO Aram Moghaddassi faces a whistleblower claim over exposing a massive database on a vulnerable cloud server.

Investor Brad Smith, who once left DOGE after budget cuts at the Department of Health and Human Services, has returned to direct global health work at the State Department. Former Andreessen Horowitz partner Scott Kupor now heads the U.S. Office of Personnel Management, while Marc Andreessen remains influential in the White House. Other Musk loyalists hold junior posts.

DOGE’s identity is increasingly blurred. “The question of how do you define DOGE? Who is DOGE? has gotten a lot more complicated,” said Faith Williams of the Project on Government Oversight. Officially led by acting chief Amy Gleeson, much of its mission has shifted to Russell Vought at the Office of Management and Budget.

Civil liberties advocate Cindy Cohn warns DOGE’s work now happens “behind a curtain,” with whistleblowers and ex-staff alleging hidden mismanagement and risks.